[Music]
welcome to uncommon knowledge I'm Peter
Robinson my guest today the investor and
philanthropist and possessor of an
unusually interesting mind Peter teal
you'll notice that Peter teal and I are
having our conversation in front of an
audience this is a meeting of the Mont
Pelerin society the organization founded
in 1947 that brings together nobel
laureates and government officials and
investors such as peter himself to
discuss economics and the state of the
world and when it comes to the state of
the world as you will see Peter teal has
opinions we discuss China and the United
States under Donald Trump and his own
world Silicon Valley which he talks
about as this is his word deranged
uncommon knowledge with Peter Thiel born
in Germany Peter Thiel moved to the
United States with his family when he
was a child he graduated from Stanford
and then from Stanford Law School and
after deciding not to practice law he
co-founded PayPal and Palantir made the
first outside investment in Facebook
funded companies such as SpaceX and
LinkedIn and started the teal fellowship
which encourages young people to drop
out of college to start their own
businesses mr. teal remains a very
active tech investor now based in Los
Angeles ladies and gentlemen Peter Thiel
chyna the late economist and foreign
policy analyst Hoover fellow Harry Rowan
writing in 1996 quote when will try to
become a democracy the answer is around
the Year 2015 this prediction is based
on China's steady and impressive
economic growth which in turn fits the
pattern of the way in which freedom has
grown in Asia and elsewhere in the world
worked in South Korea worked in Taiwan
economic growth leads to democracy in
China what went wrong well Oh Peter this
is always a set up for me to start by
both flattering you and criticizing you
a little bit since there was that very
famous Reagan speech you gave that you
wrote wrote for Reagan where it was you
know tear down that wall mr. Gorbachev
and it was very effective but it was
perhaps it was not only in the West that
we learned lessons from it the Chinese
Communists also paid very careful
attention to it and they learned that
you had to have you know you had to have
perestroika without glasnost you had to
get rid of the Marxism without getting
rid of the Leninism and and and they
learned somehow the very opposite
lessons of that fateful year in 1989
they you know Tiananmen worked in China
and and that that is what that is what
what continued to work so I think that's
that's sort of a a a simple first cut
there was nothing about history that is
automatic or predetermined it's always a
question of agency of people and and
unfortunately you know China took took
the lesson very much to heart and has
stayed on this trajectory as per capita
you know GDP is close to ten thousand
dollars which was sort of the point
where you know democracy was supposed to
start taking over and it seems to if
anything then been going the opposite
direction or there's you know there's
another there's another sort of
historical riff I have on this that I
was thinking about the other day where
it was this famous this famous interview
with Chow and why and and the early
1970s where they asked him about the
French Revolution and what did he think
of the French Revolution and he said you
know it's too early to tell which was
which was seen as sort of a funny
diplomatic
answer at the time but I've come to
think that there's sort of a very
sinister way of thinking about that
answer which is that you know in some
sense the French Revolution it ended it
ended in 1794 when the insanity burned
itself out and you had Thermidor and
then of course you know when you had the
Russian Revolution one of the promises
Lenin had was that the Russian
Revolution communist revolution would
never have a Thermidor but it took a
little bit longer than five years as did
in France but I'd argue you know you had
something like Thermidor 1956 when
Khrushchev gave the Anti Stalin speech
certainly by the time of Gorbachev China
what Chou Enlai was saying in that
speech was that China is the one country
that is still true the spirit of the
French Revolution it is the one country
in the world in which there will never
be a Thermidor and and that is that is
and that and then of course you know the
way this this manifests is that it will
still you know continue in the sort of
revolutionary communism that that will
have you know one genocide 'el thing
after another and that that that
continues under G still China three
quotations I mean two of them from
heroes of the Mont Pelerin Society
Friedrich Hayek in 1982 the mere idea
that a planning authority could ever
possess the information necessary to run
the economy is a somewhat comic fiction
what prices ought to be can never be
determined without competitive markets
close quote if you want economic growth
you must permit free markets quotation
to Milton Friedman 1991 when the regime
in China introduced a greater measure of
economic freedom that generated pressure
for more political freedom and that led
to Chen on men's square if you permit
free markets sooner or later your people
will demand political freedom and
they'll be hard to handle quotation
number three Peter teal speaking last
November artificial intelligence is the
big eye of Sauron watching you at all
times in all places close quote
will artificial intelligence overturn
Hayek and freedom will it enable China
to achieve sustained economic growth
without economic
political freedom well let's let's let's
not be too dogmatic and answering this
so you know I certainly um I certainly
think that it's possible that the
totalitarian formed the form that
totalitarian has in China will will
exhaust itself that it will hit some
kind of crisis at some point you know
China does have you know some some very
serious demographic challenges you know
maybe it's sort of like you say it's a
revealed preference that people don't
want to have children because it's very
cruel to allow a child to be born into
such a horrible Society so I think you
know there are there are ways that we
can speculate on how how it might
ultimately exhaust itself but but I
think but I think we should not be
dogmatic on the other side and assume
that it automatically will and that you
know perhaps perhaps it can sort of
develop perhaps it can sort of catch up
you can sort of get things to work and
and you know there are probably certain
parts of the economy where you don't
need to be that free or that creative or
that innovative there is just sort of
copying things that work just you know
copying the West and you can maybe you
can't get quite the our standard of
living but maybe you can get to you know
a half our standard of living or
something like that but you're not a
thing yeah you're not singling out AI as
a game changer here you tend to poopoo
the notion that AI will change things uh
well I think if it if it's it's unclear
I think there's always a lot of
propaganda around all these these buzz
words and so I I think it's it's some
it's somewhat exaggerated but but but
yes of course there's there's sort of a
continuation of the computer revolution
where you'll have you know more powerful
Leninists controls and you can have
certain you know maybe the farmers can
sell you know the back the cabbages in
the market and and you can still have
you know face recognition software that
attracts people in all times in all
places and so there's sort of a hybrid
thing that that might work for you no
longer than we'd like okay so you
touched on this a moment ago but let
let's bear in on it two competing
narratives one is the president she is
centralizing power more tightly and with
the help of technology more successfully
than any other central authority has
ever been able to do in all of human
history he is the most successful
dictator the world has seen the other
narrative is that the Chinese population
is growing old its economy is slowing
its one-child policy has produced 40
more 40 million more men than women and
that the freedom movements in Hong Kong
and Taiwan have placed Beijing seriously
on the defensive so well let's um you're
gonna choose one or the other well let
me um let us are we Telegraph I'm gonna
I'm gonna give you my speculative
conspiracy theory on how China the
Chinese Communists are trying to
psychologically undermine the West all
right and I believe they are inducing
two perspectives on China about in in
the West one perspective is that China
is very far behind us that it's still a
very poor backward country it even in 20
49 even on a hundred year anniversary it
will still only be a middle-income
country and it's it's so far behind that
we don't need to worry about it and we
can be in denial about China and the
other one is that it's so far ahead of
us that there is no way that that we can
ever that we can ever catch up it is you
know it works better there's certain
things where can it can you know build
skyscrapers super fast there's certain
things where it works so much better
that we have to just accept that we are
really far behind
you know denial is extreme optimism
acceptances extreme pessimism but
extreme optimism and extreme pessimism
converge to doing nothing and I think
there were there was for example I think
there was this there was this a question
about Taiwan and how protected Taiwan
was and I believe it was in a single
month in the year 2005 where the US
strategic assessment shifted from Taiwan
would be safe for decades because of our
you know aircraft carriers and what not
to know Taiwan was already lost because
you know they had all the China had all
these missiles that they could knock all
our defenses out overnight and so it's
it's somehow it's always so the fact
that it gets framed in these two extreme
terms I'm wondering if you're sort of a
mouthpiece of the Chinese Communist
Party
and and it's always extreme acceptance
and extreme denial and the realities
actually no it's it's closed and there
are strengths the US has and their
strengths they have and it's a fight and
it's gonna be a fight for a very long
time and even if China in some ways
gains ground in that fight it will be
strategically close for a long time
because as China gains ground other
countries will get more scared of China
and they will they will they will work
more closely with the US Japan was
toying with the idea of being of
shifting its alliance from the u.s. to
China this is always the DPJ line in
Japan in the late 90s early 2000s under
obey
that's definitively over Japan is back
firmly on the side of the u.s. Vietnam
you know much more on the US side in the
China side this is very different from
Vietnam of you know 40 years ago and and
so even if China you know sort of gains
ground in certain things I think the the
the the strategic picture will stay you
know very even for for a really long
time it's the exact talk so somehow it's
in the in between is is probably the
truth and it will be the truth for a
long time so the notion is the Chinese
want us to believe two statements one is
there's nothing to worry about the other
is resistance is futile well it's both
votes and both are frauds its China is
super weak and China is super strong and
I've been in meetings in China where in
some sense you heard you got both
messages within twenty minutes of one
another and it's it's it's like
logically inconsistent but
psychologically it doubles up all right
the United States is the center of the
resistance let's take a moment or two
considering what we need to resist right
here zombie socialism socialism rising
from the dead again a couple of
quotations the first from a history of
the Mont Pelerin Society in the 1980s
and 90s members of the Society had the
exhilarating feeling that things were at
last going their way
several countries starting with Margaret
Thatcher's government in Britain were
privatizing their state industries
governments from China to India to
America to France were liberalizing
retrenching or cutting taxes and then in
1989 with astonishing speed the iron
curtain fell here's quotation number two
this is Bernie Sanders he's speaking in
night
89 the year the Berlin Wall came down
quote in Vermont everybody knows I'm a
socialist and that many people in our
movement are socialists and I think
there's been too much of reluctance on
the part of progressives and radicals to
use the word socialism close quote as we
sit here this evening
the self-avowed socialist Bernie Sanders
is tipped by many to win the Democratic
caucuses in Iowa on February third from
the triumph of Democrat Democratic
capitalism and all that the Mont Pelerin
Society stands for to the re-emergence
of socialism how did this happen
these are I guess these are like
sweeping questions are all these
different answers one could one could
give but but let's three let's let's
just challenge a little bit the premise
that question um you know I I don't
think he's really a socialist in the
sense I mean there's no five-year plan
he doesn't he doesn't actually claim
that he's gonna make the post office or
the DMV work better if he was promising
things like this it would just be it
would just be completely completely
ridiculous and you know the way in which
socialism works is it's just this thing
that's really different and it's
different it's meant in opposition to
the zombie institutions in our society
and and there is a problem that we have
you know I you know we don't have a very
well functioning capitalist society you
know there's a generational problem
where it is difficult for young people
to to acquire capital and you know I say
there's sort of two if I give sort and
that's you know the young people that
are supporting Bernie Sanders and we and
you know there's sort of the two simple
political things that you know one
should one should really think about are
the the runaway student debt in colleges
you know it's 300 billion dollars in
student debt in 2000s up to 1.7 trillion
dollars today and if you start your life
in debt that can never be discharged in
bankruptcy you know it'll be much harder
to accumulate capital and you might be
less friendly to capitalism so that's
that's a that is a big problem and you
know I think I don't think we should
socialize the student debt but we should
deal with it any non soul
way we should internalize the costs on
to the universities we should redo the
bankruptcy laws yes you can discharge
the student debt and when you discharge
it it's the college that gave you a bad
education that gets a that gets um stuck
with a bill that's for the non-socialist
alternative and and then and then you
know I think the other the other basic
problem of a lack of capital or
inequality is that it's very hard for
people to get onto the onto the housing
ladder you know the main way that the
people in the middle class in this
country accumulate capital is through
owning real estate through owning your
house and and if it if through a series
of urban zoning laws and bad planning
and impossibility of building things it
has become impossible for people to get
onto onto that and if you could find
ways for for people to own more houses
you would have much less of these sort
of millennial craze socialism so I think
I think you know we should we should try
to understand where it's coming from
which we need to try to try to solve it
but but you know at the end of the day I
think it will be pretty weak because
it's mainly a critique it's a critique
of of bad institutions and if if Sanders
become serious I think it'll be it'll be
as scary as Corbin was in the UK and
obviously um you know what we'll be
talking about the post office and the
DMV and it'll just be ridiculous Bernie
Sanders cannot get elected any more
linked it it cannot write the
universities you touched on this
enormity go again a couple of quotations
Michelle Obama the one thing I've been
telling my daughters is that I don't
want them to choose a name University
there are thousands of amazing
universities in this country quotation
number two Peter teal of course we knew
she was lying
yes this was this was an interview that
they gave just before their eldest
daughter Molly it was was thinking about
what what university to go to and this
is we sort of it I sort of raised this
it was heard in the context of I've
always the sort of question of fact
checking and you know politicians lying
and I think the the facts we need to
check the most analyzed we need to call
people out on the most are the really
big lies that everybody tells and so you
know I added that it was it was actually
it was very reassuring disturbing if
they weren't lying I mean like if they
if they actually believed that nonsense
that would been really disturbing and
where did Molly end up going to Harvard
but it's always you know this is a theme
that you know and you can go on all
these all these critiques at the
universities but basically you know the
basic problem is if you think of it as
an economic good you know is it a
consumption good is an investment good
so as a day is it an investment where
you're investing for your future is it a
consider before your party okay that
hybrid is pretty weird but I think it's
actually a hybrid of a on a an insurance
policy that people buy to avoid falling
through the big cracks in our society
and a tournament a zero-sum tournament
where the elite universities like
Harvard and Stanford are basically on
sort of a studio 54 night club with a
long line and a big velvet rope and and
if you were you know if you were the
president of Stanford or of Harvard and
if you had some kind of crazed martyr
complex where you wanted a mob of
students faculty and alumni to come
after you should give a speech saying
this University is offering a great
education and you know Harvard you know
it used to just educate the 200 million
people who live in the US states
educating the eight billion people in
the world and so we should increase the
enrollment not by factor of 40 but let's
say two or three over the next 20 years
and you would just get lunched because
you're running a studio 54 nightclub you
shouldn't forget it political
correctness at the universities if this
is you I'm quoting you once again if you
have a majority of the vote that's good
if you get 70 percent that's even better
and if you get 99.99% of the vote you're
in North Korea
in 2016 how many professors at the top
five law schools endorsed Donald Trump
zero and and the law school examples
interesting because you would think it's
one where if you took the control law a
lot of academic fields are more internal
to academia but law is one that sort of
cashes out in a governmental political
context and taking a contrarian position
in theory is quite valuable you know if
you're a tenured law professor at
Harvard and you're the only law
professor to top law school to endorse
Trump o'madden I think there would be
like a 50% chance you would have gotten
nominated to the Supreme Court or
something like that and that that seems
so it seems like it's the sort of thing
where the contrarian the contrarian
thing is is quite would be quite
valuable and then when if nobody takes
that bet I mean wow there must be some
unbelievable enforcement mechanisms and
it's you know it's not it's sort of like
a gentle version of North Korea but it's
it's like you know even though you have
tenure it's like wow they can they can
relegate you to some broom closet and
play loud music or something I mean
they'll figure out something some way to
punish you Silicon Valley we've
discussed this a number of times when
you were starting PayPal you have said
many times the whole valley felt as if
it was truly dedicated to free markets
and entrepreneurship and if you talked
about politics you were wasting your
time today it feels woke more than woke
I'm going to quote you again in recent
years Silicon Valley has become
completely deranged close quote what is
the nature of that derangement and how
did that happen well this is what this
one's actually hard for me to explain
because it's it's it's it's it's it's
it's quite uh it's it's a it's a
remarkable shift certainly from from 20
years ago I I would say that there is a
question how much how much innovation is
actually happening and that's that I
always come back to where I'm somewhat
on the sort of side that we've we've had
you know generally sort of limited
progress and technology and science the
last 50 years there was you
very big exception and computers
software internet mobile internet the
last quarter century this was sort of
this narrow cone of progress in the
world of bits that that really drove
things and and I sort of wonder if if
there's actually less innovation
possible even in those areas at this
point so if you if you look back over
the last five years let's say there have
been fewer new consumer Internet
companies that have come out and sort of
maybe the easy ideas have been picked
maybe we need to move on to other areas
but the other areas are regulated and
difficult so biotech or you know um all
kinds of futuristic science areas are
deceptively hard and and we're in a zone
where you know the returns accrue to the
larger companies and so if you say if
you're sort of an early innovative boom
face like the dot-com boom in the 90s
it's all startups it's some small
companies that you start new things
um you know when I when I started PayPal
in 99 one of the questions I was always
asked was why can't a big bank just do
this and I never really had a good
answer to it I I now think the answer is
roughly that most big corporate
institutions are very political they're
very slow they're not actually good at
innovating and and that's that's why you
have startups that's why you have small
companies that's why you're able to
emerge and the big banks are too
political to do anything new and so if
you can do something anyone can do
reasonably quickly there's their space
to do this and I think that the ratio of
these bigger to smaller ones has shifted
a lot and it is probably just a less
innovative place and so in this cash is
out you know in all sorts of in all
sorts of ways in all sorts of ways in
all sorts of ways politically there's of
course you know these things are always
over determined you can say it's it's
it's linked to California California was
you know a 50/50 Republican Democrat
state forty years ago now it's a d-plus
thirty it's the second most democratic
state in this country and so there's
sort of a way in which the environment
pushes it there's probably there's
probably a degree to which Silicon
Valley the work force in Silicon Valley
is the most educated in the country has
most you know advanced degrees college
degrees in advanced degrees and from the
elite universities and maybe the more
education you have more brainwashed you
are and and so there's sort of just sort
of a version of that so so I think it I
think it's sort of um you know I but but
I think I think there are parts of it
that just seem that seem you know
completely unhinged you know Elizabeth
Warren has taken out these uh these
banners I'm saying that you know she she
would on in Silicon Valley's billboard
saying that she would break up Facebook
Google Amazon for antitrust and I
believe maybe it's shifted a little bit
but the first two three quarters of 2019
among Google employees I think Google's
the craziest of the other big tech
companies um Elizabeth Warren got a
plurality of the donations she got more
donations than anybody else and so you
know if she were by some miracle to get
elected I think you know I think she
would be able to argue that even the
people at the big tech companies think
they should be destroyed and and so
there are there are parts of it that
seem seem just completely deranged in
ways I can't fully explain visions of
the future during a trip to Europe last
year you realize that at least in
Western Europe there are really only
three visions of the future on offer
vision one accommodation more or less in
one way or another with Sharia explain
well well I would say that I think in in
politics or culture for the future to
have power over the present me start
with the general point it has to it has
to be different from the present the
future has power because it's a time
that will look different from the
present and and and so it can't just be
an endless Groundhog Day if it's just
always the same it's just always
repetition then the future does not have
any appeal and that's not part of a
political agenda and so if we if we look
at Europe and we say well how will
Europe be different from from from the
way it is today in the future I think
there's sort of three pictures of a very
different future and sort of behind door
number one is Islamic sharia law and if
you're a woman you'll be wearing a burqa
so that's a very different picture of
the future it's very concrete behind
door number two is the Chinese Communist
a I and it's the big eye of Sauron that
we're watching you at all times in all
places that's a door number two for the
future and door number three is the
green movement and you will be puttering
around in an East scooter and you'll be
separating out your garbage and
recycling can and and and then and then
I think the the challenges that there
are no other doors those are the three
options and this is a even though I'm
you know I'm not I'm not a crazy
environmentalist this is this is this
would be my sort of our argument for why
the green stuff has so much traction in
Europe it's if those are the only three
options you know I mean I'll go with
greater so but so but there are two
places maybe I'm putting this to you to
see what you think of it where there is
a fourth vision of the future that
involves economic growth a reassertion
of economic growth a reassertion of
national sovereignty and a reassertion
of cultural self-confidence and those
two places would be the United Kingdom
of Boris Johnson and the United States
of Donald Trump you're going to go for
that I I would go with much more much
more than you know well the UK is sort
of you us much more than the UK but I'll
drop out Lee I'm just what your vote for
I'd go with Israel over the UK before of
course me to listen to but but sure
let's say let's say US UK Israel I'll go
with those three okay okay that's that's
that's usually try to ask questions you
pay sort of halfway between it's halfway
between the US and Europe so it's you
know it's it's a it's better than Europe
it's worse than the US all right Peter
according you again last November I
would encourage us and you were talking
to a conservative crowd like this crowd
I would encourage us to rethink the
doctrine of American exceptionalism what
did you mean by that
well it's it's um it's it's it's it's
again it's it's this question of how you
know how we're stacking up as a as a as
a country and and I think the you know
the the analogy that I have made to
exceptionalism is is that it's it's like
it's like the radically monotheistic God
of Islam and Judaism where it's so
one-of-a-kind and so radically different
that it can't be compared or measured in
any way and so when we say that we are
exceptional
we are often saying that we're so
different that we can't even make sense
of how we're doing and then one gets the
suspicion that there's a way that
exceptionalism can degenerate into a
cover for all sorts of things that are
exceptionally out of kilter and so we
have a society in which people are
exceptionally addicted to opioids we
exceptionally overweight or we have a
society in which people are
exceptionally unselfish and and the
alternative that I would that I would
pose is something more like greatness
where it is it's a comparative function
and we would ask questions you know how
are we stacking up how are we stacking
up compared to our past how are we
stacking up compared to other countries
and and that's where there all sorts of
questions that would come to the fore
you know I think I think coming back to
the the stagnation one you know one of
the things that I would want to quantify
more is you know we in the world of
science we can quantify things to annex
credible degree of Avogadro's number the
fine structure constant physics all
these things are precise to many
significant figures but the question
about the rate of progress of science of
innovation is incredibly unquantified
and it's just sort of hand waving and if
you sort of have service Pangloss Ian's
hand waving where everything's
exceptional and we're accelerating at
the fastest pace possible and it's not
measurable my my sort of suspicion is
that these are sort of the ever narrower
communities of sub experts the string
theorists the cancer researchers telling
us how great other strings there is some
cancer
Searchers respectively are it's a it's a
place where there's no outside check no
reality check
no no ability to really keep score and
you are you are certainly not
exceptional and you're not even great
once again from the history of the Mont
Pelerin Society quote the original
members shared a common sense of crisis
a conviction that freedom was being
threatened and that something should be
done about it they concluded that the
threat arose from erroneous Theory so
they committed themselves not to
political action but to winning the
intellectual battle of ideas close quote
here are some members of the mount
Pelerin society over the years Milton
Friedman Friedrich Hayek George Stigler
Gary Becker James Buchanan and others
have won Nobel prizes has the
intellectual battle been won such that
we should all shift our attention to
political action well it's um I don't I
don't think the intellectual battle is
ever fully over because I don't think
history is over alright and I I would
say um I would save anything if I if I
had to sort of characterize the the
intellectual landscape you know we've
been in a world for a very long time in
which somehow the range of intellectual
debate has gotten more and more narrow
and you sort of know the Overtoun
windows shift to the left but generally
in an ever narrower way and you could
sort of say that we've been in a bear
market for ideas I think for something
like the last 50 years and so you know a
lot of people you cited I think of as
pre the late 1960s and and that in the
last 50 years if you had crazy ideas he
could ideas that were outside the box
those were always bad and you got
clobbered and you couldn't get tenure
you couldn't even you couldn't get
funding because everything was
peer-reviewed up the wazoo and and and I
think we're now at a point where we've
been in such a long bear market for
ideas and the Overton Window is so
uncomfortably narrow that I would I
would be long ideas more than any other
point in the last 50 years
I think I think we're not going to find
solutions inside the intellectual
straightjacket in which our universities
in our society put us and I think I
think there will be positive returns to
ideas greater than there have been in
the last 50 years last couple of
questions one this one begins again by
quoting Milton Friedman I believe a
relatively free economy is a necessary
condition for a Democratic Society
but I also believe there is evidence
that a Democratic Society once
established destroys a free economy
close quote
do we really have any reason at all for
optimism or is the whole magnificent
project doomed I just I just um I you
know I'm not I'm not sure like I think
always extreme optimism extreme
pessimism are both equally wrong it's
always you know as a libertarian we
should always the libertarians we should
always come back to the question of
individual agency and it's it's it's not
these these large historic forces and
there are there are libertarian or
pseudo libertarian narratives in which
there were these large historic forces
and we sort of definitively won these
battles but that's that's not even true
to to the spirit of free markets or
belief in individuals there's always
room for history there's always room for
new ideas and these things are are never
definitively decided one way or the
other
all right last question and this touches
on the notion of greatness that you were
discussing a moment ago George Kennan
the issue of soviet-american relations
is in essence a test of the overall
worth of the United States to avoid
destruction the United States need only
measure up to its own best traditions
and prove itself worthy of preservation
as a great nation Kenan writes that in
1951 if we replace the reference to the
Soviet Union with a reference to China
would you subscribe to that statement
today yes and I I don't I don't know I
always I'm always uncomfortable with
saying it's a simple template though so
so if we just go with the simple
template it's to automatic and then if
it's to automatic we're back in your in
your berlin tear down this wall speech
and then we've replaced the reference
and we're you know we we know china's a
soviet union and because we say it's the
soviet union we don't need to do
anything else because we knew that just
all happened on its own and you know in
practice you know the Cold War was one
and you know in you know very specific
ways that was sort of there were sort of
a whole series of concrete situations
that you had to deal with and and the
rival with with China it's it's somewhat
different that's happening in an
Information Age not industrial age it's
happening it's you know there's sort of
a there's sort of a global a global
competition question there's a there's
sort of a way in which the two economies
are very deeply connected
we weren't deeply connect to the Soviet
Union so there are sort of a lot of
things about it that are are very
different and and I think yeah we have
to you know it's not like 2020 is like
1951 or like you know 1989 2020 is like
2020 which is much less helpful but much
more accurate peter thiel thank you
[Music]